# SQL: creating structures

Here you will learn how to create a database, connect to it, and create a table for it.

## Requirements

- `PostgreSQL` server installed and running.
- `psql` installed

## Creating a database

Let's create a database named `my_app`, follow these steps:
1. Connect to your PostgreSQL server with `psql`
```
> psql

psql (11.5 (Debian 11.5-3.pgdg90+1))
Type "help" for help.

postgres=#
```

1. Create the database `my_app`
```sql
postgres=# CREATE DATABASE my_app;
CREATE DATABASE
```

2. Connect to your database `my_app`. For this we have two options:
    - Inside your current session do:
    ```
    postgres=# \c my_app
    You are now connected to database "my_app" as user "mevaterapia_user".
    my_app=#
    ```
    - Exit your current `psql` session and connect again using `psql`:
    ```
    > psql my_app

    psql (11.5 (Debian 11.5-3.pgdg90+1))
    Type "help" for help.

    my_app=#
    ```

That's it! Congratulations, you have created your database and connected to it. Next, we will add a table.

- [PostgreSQL: Create a database](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createdatabase.html)

## Creating a table

A table will consist of one or more columns, which can be of many data types. From these columns, you'll need to choose one (or more) that represent the table's primary key. This primary key (PK) is how you reference a row in the table so it must be unique for all rows, for this, there are two general practices:
- Natural primary key: Uses one (or more) of the columns created for your data.
- Artificial/Synthetic primary key: Uses an extra column, not needed for your data, usually called `id`. Its value is generated by default when inserting using SQL's `IDENTITY` (you will learn more about the `IDENTITY` column in next steps. Right now you just need to know that its values will be autogenerated.)

For example, to create a table for students that has to keep track of their first name, last name, age, and student ID we would use the following SQL statement:

```sql
-- We will use an artificial PK
CREATE TABLE students(
  id            INT GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY,
  student_id    INT,
  age           INT,
  first_name    VARCHAR(250),
  last_name     VARCHAR(250),
  PRIMARY KEY(id)
);
```

As you can see we chose to use an artificial primary key (`id`) and not a natural one. You might be tempted to think that `student_id` could be used as the primary key, but we have no information regarding if it is unique for each student.

Good job! Now you are ready to start inserting data into your database.
